Guard conditions in when expressions (#4417)
JetBrains/kotlin-web-site: docs/topics/control-flow.md

The scope of variable introduced in *when* subject is restricted to the body of this *when*.

> ### Guard conditions in when expressions

Author: I'll leave it as guard conditions to aim for a more descriptive term.

> Guard conditions are an [experimental feature](components-stability.md#stability-levels-explained) that may be changed at any time.
> We would appreciate your feedback in [YouTrack](https://youtrack.jetbrains.com/issue/KT-71140/Guard-conditions-in-when-expressions-feedback).
>
{type="warning"}

> Starting from Kotlin 2.1, you can use guard conditions in `when` expressions or statements with a subject.

Reviewer: Actually, we try to avoid such phrases since our documentation reflects the latest state of the language.

Guard conditions allow you to include more than one condition to the branches of a `when` expression, making complex control flow more explicit and concise.

> To include a guard condition in a branch, place the guard condition after the primary condition, separated by `if`:

Reviewer: place **it**.
Will it work? 
Just to avoid repetition.

> To include a guard condition in a branch, place the guard condition together with the `if` keyword after the primary condition:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To include a guard condition in a branch, place the guard condition after the primary condition, separated by `if`:
```

```kotlin
sealed interface Animal {

>     class Cat(val mouseHunter: Boolean) : Animal

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    data class Cat(val mouseHunter: Boolean) : Animal
```

>     data object Dog : Animal

Reviewer 2: This seems a bit weird, as `object` seems to imply that there's just one single dog.

```suggestion
    data class Dog(val breed: String) : Animal
```

}

fun feedAnimal(animal: Animal) {
    when (animal) {

>         // Branch with only primary condition. Returns `feedDog()` when `Animal` is `Dog`

Reviewer 3: It calls the function, not "returns" it, right?

Author: True, fix it

>         Animal.Dog -> feedDog()

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
        is Animal.Dog -> feedDog()
```

Missing `is` in the branch

        // Branch with both primary and guard conditions. Returns `feedCat()` when `Animal` is `Cat` and is not `mouseHunter`
        is Animal.Cat if !animal.mouseHunter -> feedCat()
        // Returns "Unknown animal" if none of the above conditions match
        else -> println("Unknown animal")
    }
}
```

> In a single `when` expression, you can combine both branches with and without a guard condition. 

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In a single `when` expression, you can combine branches both with and without a guard condition. 
```

> The code in the branches with a guard condition runs only if the primary condition and the guard condition evaluate to true.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The code in a branche with a guard condition runs only if both the primary condition and the guard condition evaluate to true.
```

If the primary condition does not match, the guard condition is not evaluated. 

> If you use guard conditions in `when` statements without an `else` branch, if none of the conditions matches, none of the branches is executed. 

Reviewer: I'd like to avoid "if" doubling. 
Can we say: If you use guard conditions in `when` statements without an `else` branch, and none of the conditions match, no branches are executed.

> Otherwise, if you use guard conditions in `when` expressions without an `else` branch, the compiler requires you to declare all the possible cases (to avoid runtime errors).

Reviewer: I guess that "to avoid runtime errors" could be mentioned without parentheses.

Additionally, guard conditions support `else if`:

```kotlin
when (animal) {
    // Checks if `animal` is `Dog`
    is Animal.Dog -> feedDog()
    // Guard condition that checks if `animal` is `Cat` and not `mouseHunter`
    is Animal.Cat if !animal.mouseHunter -> feedCat()
    // Returns giveLettuce() if none of the above conditions match and animal.eatsPlants is true
    else if animal.eatsPlants -> giveLettuce()
    // Returns "Unknown animal" if none of the above conditions match
    else -> println("Unknown animal")
}
```

Combine multiple guard conditions within a single branch using the boolean operators `&&` (AND) or `||` (OR).

> It is [strongly recommended](coding-conventions.md#guard-conditions-in-when-expression) to use parentheses around the boolean expressions to avoid confusion:

Reviewer: How about to rephrase it as
"To avoid confusion, use parentheses ...". Or is it too strong?

Author: Left it as "Use parentheses around the boolean expressions to..." to make it action-oriented.

```kotlin
when (animal) {
    is Animal.Cat if (!animal.mouseHunter && animal.hungry) -> feedCat()
}
```

> You can use guard conditions in any `when` expression or statement with a subject, except the case when you have multiple conditions separated by a comma
> (for example: `0, 1 -> print("x == 0 or x == 1")`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can use guard conditions in any `when` expression or statement with a subject, except the case when you have multiple conditions separated by a comma.
For example, `0, 1 -> print("x == 0 or x == 1")`.
```

> To enable guard conditions in CLI, run the following command:
>
> `kotlinc -Xwhen-guards main.kt`
>
> To enable guard conditions in Gradle, run the following command:
>

> > `kotlin.compilerOptions.freeCompilerArgs.add("-Xwhen-guards")t`

Reviewer: Shouldn't the option be added to the `build.gradle.kts` file?

Author: True. Great catch!
